23-10-2025/README.md, before:

# Lightweight-NIDS
This project is a lightweight network intrution detection system which utilizes `hping3` as a subprocess and using a python script to simulate an IDS on a raspberry pi. I have used two displays, one for the nids console and another for displaying potential attacker's IP address. Please note this project is for simulation purpose and is under contineous improvement. 
You can find the snapshots of the NIDS in action in the `snapshots` dir.

## Hardware
- Raspberry Pi Zero 2W
- 1602 LCD module
- SSD1306 OLED module
- jumperwires and breadboard (if you need)

## Hardware setup
<p align="center">
  <img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e3c6f7a7-27d1-463e-ac2a-4967c7eea3d7" alt="GPIO-Pinout-Diagram" width="40%" />
  <img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/05ccac08-1b31-4d38-a6ef-6b8f96fd70c5" alt="displays" width="40%" />
</p>

Open a terminal on the rpi and use the `sudo raspi-config` then navigate to Interfaces to enable I2C connection. 
Using jumper wires on a bread board connect:<br>
[NOTE: the serial data and clock will be shared for both the displays.]
### SSD1306
- SDA to Pin 3 on rpi.
- SCL to Pin 5.
- GND to Pin 6.
- VCC to pin 1.
### 1602 LCD
- SDA to pin 3.
- SCL to pin 5.
- GND to pin 9.
- VCC to Pin 2.

*Once you wire the hardware, verify the connection `sudo i2cdetect -y` this should display a grid of memory address, LCD should have 0x27 and the oled should have 0x3C memory address.*

## Script
You can find the python script in this repository itself. Copy the code and run `sudo python3 lwnids.py` and it will initialize the setup.

## Automation
To make it run as soon as it is connected to a network or it reboots, you can run it as a service.
- sudo nano /etc/systemd/system/nids.service
```
[Unit]
Description=NIDS Monitor
After=network-online.target
Wants=network-online.target

[Service]
Type=simple
ExecStart=/usr/bin/python3 /home/pi/lwnids.py <---replace it with the path of the script
WorkingDirectory=/home/pi
StandardOutput=journal
StandardError=journal
Restart=always
RestartSec=5
User=root
Environment=PYTHONUNBUFFERED=1

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```
- sudo systemctl daemon-reload
- sudo systemctl enable nids.service
- sudo systemctl start nids.service
- sudo systemctl status nids.service
Once you complete this step verify if it works by rebooting the pi.

## Testing
After connecting the raspberry pi and your pc to the same network find the IP address of the rpi. Now flood the rpi with ping requests from the windows pc : `ping 10.162.241.188 -t`.
You will see the rpi detects it and displays alerts on both the displays.
- The SSD1306 oled module will display potential attacker's IP address.
- 1602 LCD module will display the NIDS program console.

Commit message:

Update README with project details and note
Added a note about the project's initial development and updated project.

23-10-2025/README.md, after:

# Lightweight-NIDS (23-10-2025) 
*[NOTE: This directory has the initial development of the NIDS, this was for initial conceptual understanding. Kindly checkout the latest updated project which uses Random Forest classifier using scikit-learn.]*
This project is a lightweight network intrution detection system which utilizes `hping3` as a subprocess and using a python script to simulate an IDS on a raspberry pi. I have used two displays, one for the nids console and another for displaying potential attacker's IP address. Please note this project is for simulation purpose and is under contineous improvement. 
You can find the snapshots of the NIDS in action in the `snapshots` dir.

## Hardware
- Raspberry Pi Zero 2W
- 1602 LCD module
- SSD1306 OLED module
- jumperwires and breadboard (if you need)

## Hardware setup
<p align="center">
  <img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e3c6f7a7-27d1-463e-ac2a-4967c7eea3d7" alt="GPIO-Pinout-Diagram" width="40%" />
  <img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/05ccac08-1b31-4d38-a6ef-6b8f96fd70c5" alt="displays" width="40%" />
</p>

Open a terminal on the rpi and use the `sudo raspi-config` then navigate to Interfaces to enable I2C connection. 
Using jumper wires on a bread board connect:<br>
[NOTE: the serial data and clock will be shared for both the displays.]
### SSD1306
- SDA to Pin 3 on rpi.
- SCL to Pin 5.
- GND to Pin 6.
- VCC to pin 1.
### 1602 LCD
- SDA to pin 3.
- SCL to pin 5.
- GND to pin 9.
- VCC to Pin 2.

*Once you wire the hardware, verify the connection `sudo i2cdetect -y` this should display a grid of memory address, LCD should have 0x27 and the oled should have 0x3C memory address.*

## Script
You can find the python script in this repository itself. Copy the code and run `sudo python3 lwnids.py` and it will initialize the setup.

## Automation
To make it run as soon as it is connected to a network or it reboots, you can run it as a service.
- sudo nano /etc/systemd/system/nids.service
```
[Unit]
Description=NIDS Monitor
After=network-online.target
Wants=network-online.target

[Service]
Type=simple
ExecStart=/usr/bin/python3 /home/pi/lwnids.py <---replace it with the path of the script
WorkingDirectory=/home/pi
StandardOutput=journal
StandardError=journal
Restart=always
RestartSec=5
User=root
Environment=PYTHONUNBUFFERED=1

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```
- sudo systemctl daemon-reload
- sudo systemctl enable nids.service
- sudo systemctl start nids.service
- sudo systemctl status nids.service
Once you complete this step verify if it works by rebooting the pi.

## Testing
After connecting the raspberry pi and your pc to the same network find the IP address of the rpi. Now flood the rpi with ping requests from the windows pc : `ping 10.162.241.188 -t`.
You will see the rpi detects it and displays alerts on both the displays.
- The SSD1306 oled module will display potential attacker's IP address.
- 1602 LCD module will display the NIDS program console.
